>> Sreenivasan: A NEW
INVESTIGATIVE SERIES FROM
PROPUBLICA CALLED "BOMBS IN OUR
BACKYARD" LOOKS AT THE DISPOSAL
OF MILITARY WASTE AND HOW IT'S
AFFECTING COMMUNITIES AROUND THE
UNITED STATES.
YESTERDAY, I SPOKE WITH THE
AUTHOR OF THE SERIES, ABRAHM
LUSTGARTEN, FROM THE NEWSHOUR
STUDIOS IN WASHINGTON, D.C.
GIVE US AN OVERVIEW.
HOW SIGNIFICANT IS THE PROBLEM
OF MILITARY WASTE DISPOSAL IN
THE UNITED STATES?
>> STARTING AT WORLD WAR I,
EVERY BOMB, EVERY BULLET, EVERY
WEAPON THAT WE HAVE DEVELOPED
FOR DEFENSE PURPOSES HAS BEEN
DEVELOPED, DESIGNED,
MANUFACTURED, THROUGH INDUSTRIAL
PROCESSES, THEN TESTED, AND
EVENTUALLY IN MANY CASES
DISPOSED OF AS THEY GET OLD
AND EXPIRE ON AMERICAN SOIL.
>> Sreenivasan: AREN'T THERE
ALREADY ENVIRONMENTAL
REGULATIONS FROM THE E.P.A. OR
OTHER PLACES THAT WOULD PROTECT
WATER OR AIR QUALITY?
I MEAN, DOES THE MILITARY HAVE
AN EXEMPTION FROM THOSE?
>> YEAH, I MEAN, THERE ARE
STRINGENT ENVIRONMENTAL
PROTECTION AGENCY REGULATIONS,
SOME OF WHICH APPLY TO THE
PENTAGON AND SOME WHICH DON'T.
IN THE CASE OF OPEN BURNS, THE
PENTAGON'S ESSENTIALLY BURNING
WHAT'S DEFINED AS HAZARDOUS
WASTE.
AND THE E.P.A. REGULATED THE
BURNING OF HAZARDOUS WASTE BACK
IN THE 1980s.
SO, 30 YEARS OR SO YEARS AGO.
EXPLOSIVES WERE ADMITTEDLY
DIFFICULT TO DEAL WITH.
SO AT THE TIME THEY CREATED A
LITTLE BIT OF A LOOPHOLE THAT
SAID THAT THE PENTAGON AND OTHER
SPECIALIZED COMPANIES THAT DEAL
ONLY IN EXPLOSIVES CAN CONTINUE
TO BURN THAT STUFF IF THAT'S THE
ONLY WAY THEY CAN GET RID OF IT,
BUT ONLY UNTIL THEY IMPROVE
TECHNOLOGY, FIGURE OUT A BETTER
WAY TO DEAL WITH IT, AT WHICH
POINT THEY WOULD BE REQUIRED BY
THE REGULATIONS TO MOVE TO THOSE
ALTERNATIVES.
THOSE NOW EXIST, THEY HAVE FOR A
LONG TIME, BUT THE DEPARTMENT OF
DEFENSE STILL LEANS VERY HEAVILY
ON BURNING AS THEIR STANDBY
PROCESS.
>> Sreenivasan: HOW WIDESPREAD
IS THIS AROUND THE COUNTRY?
I MEAN, YOU HAVE A MAP IN ONE
OF YOUR STORIES.
HOW MANY DIFFERENT SITES ARE
THERE THAT ARE DOING THIS THAT
COULD BE OF CONCERN TO THE
NEIGHBORHOOD THAT THEY'RE IN?
>> SO, WE OBTAINED A LIST THAT
HAD BEEN COMPILED INTERNALLY
WITHIN THE E.P.A., AND IT LISTED
JUST ABOUT 200 SITES.
197 SITES ACROSS THE COUNTRY,
WHERE BURNS HAD BEEN DOCUMENTED.
NOT ALL OF THOSE ARE STILL
OPERATING NOW.
THERE ARE ABOUT 60 SITES STILL
OPERATING NOW, ABOUT 51 OF WHICH
ARE OPERATED DIRECTLY BY THE
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE OR ITS
CONTRACTORS, AS OPPOSED TO NASA,
AND A COUPLE OF OTHER PRIVATE
COMPANIES.
THOSE SITES STILL TODAY BURN
ANYWHERE FROM A COUPLE HUNDRED
THOUSAND POUNDS OF EXPLOSIVES A
YEAR, UP TO 15 MILLION POUNDS OF
EXPLOSIVES A YEAR.
>> Sreenivasan: SO ONE OF THE
PLACES THAT YOU PROFILED
ACTUALLY HAD AN ELEMENTARY
SCHOOL NOT TOO FAR AWAY, THERE
WERE PEOPLE THAT WERE ON
ADJACENT FARMS.
WHAT ARE THE KIND OF HEALTH
CONSEQUENCES THEY'RE HAVING?
>> IT'S REALLY DIFFICULT TO KNOW
WHAT THE DIRECT CONSEQUENCES ARE
OF THE BURNING.
WHAT WE KNOW IS THAT IN THE
PLACE THAT I LOOKED AT, RADFORD,
VIRGINIA; COLFAX, LOUISIANA IS
ANOTHER TOWN; AND IN OTHER
PLACES, THERE ARE PEOPLE WHO
APPEAR TO HAVE UNUSUALLY HIGH
RATES OF ILLNESSES.
THEY'RE CONCERNED ABOUT WHAT'S
CAUSING THOSE ILLNESSES.
THEY SUSPECT IT COULD BE TIED TO
THE POLLUTION.
ON THE OTHER HAND, IT'S WELL
DOCUMENTED, AND DISCLOSED, THAT
THERE IS SUBSTANTIAL POLLUTION,
THAT THE POLLUTION POSES A
SUBSTANTIAL HEALTH THREAT.
BUT PART OF WHAT WE FOCUSED ON
IN THIS STORY THIS WEEK IS THE
LACK OF AN EFFORT TO TRY TO
BRIDGE THAT QUESTION AND THAT
ANSWER.
THERE'S REALLY BEEN REMARKABLY
LITTLE ATTENTION PAID TO TRYING
TO DETERMINE WHETHER PEOPLE ARE
ACTUALLY GETTING SICK FROM THESE
OPERATIONS.
>> Sreenivasan: ALL RIGHT.
ABRAHM LUSTGARTEN FROM
PROPUBLICA, JOINING US FROM SAN
FRANCISCO TODAY.
THANK YOU SO MUCH FOR YOUR TIME.
>> THANK YOU.